Hello everybody. Welcome to a new episode of the
Center. I'm your host as always Ricardo Loops.
And today I'm joined by doctors Darcia Narvaez and Gay
Bradshaw. Doctor Darcia Narvaez is a Professor of Psychology
Merit at the University of Notre Dame. And Doctor
G Bradshaw is a psychologist and Ecologist and director of
the Kulu Center for Nonviolence. And today we're focusing
on their book. They Evolved Nest Nature's Way of
raising Children and creating connected communities. So, welcome
to the show. It's a pleasure to have you
both on. Great to be here. So I
would like to start by asking what is exactly the
premise of the book and what is an evolved next
? Well, every animal has a nest for uh
raising its young. It's a developmental system that has
uh been shaped through evolution to optimize normal development.
And so these are uh just part of our adaptation
as animals a and are these uh species specific or
are they or are there some commonalities across species?
There are commonalities and differences too? So it's uh
that's what's fun about the book is that we note
the similarities and then we point out, oh,
look at how they do it, that this animal
species does it this way and, and that kind
of thing. So, uh it's just a um
a way of raising the young that is about nurturance
and meeting the needs of the young, the basic
needs without delay, without, you know, depending
on the species, what that means and to foster
a sense of connectedness of safety, of security and
of uh physiological, mental, psychological well being.
Yeah, I think what the book does is really
uh cements what has been known in uh Western science
for hundreds of years actually. But in particular,
the last decades when neuroscience has come to the fore
and that's that all animals and now there's going to
be including the data and theory and experimentation on plants
, trees, et cetera that we all share the
same um capacities and structures of the brain or of
the system that gives us the capacity to think,
feel love and dream and all of those things.
So that's really been known, but it's been quite
tacit and this particular book and, and our collaboration
really has shown that there's a uh that we're all
the same. It, it's rather than differences.
The emphasis is on diversity. So when you're saying
, is there species specific? Yes, there is
just like there are among human cultures. And I
think that that's probably the the the best way to
uh uh readers and listeners to approach. This is
saying oh, you know, we're all the same
and yet we interact and we express our interactions and
experiences where we live in our, our history in
different ways, just as we look at different human
cultures. So there are very different aspects of child
rearing and our uh individuals from the same family or
community, establish relationships among themselves that you explore in
the book. We don't have time here, of
course, to get into all of them. But
let's get perhaps into a few examples. So could
you tell us perhaps how mothers and all mothers uh
the role they play basically in, for example,
African elephant societies? Well, I'll start in Darsha
, you can, you can fill in with things
. Um African elephants are a prime example. They've
been extremely well studied by science and um a lot
of people have a lot of humans have a lot
of affinity for them. Um Just to clarify alo
mother, uh mother usually refers to the, the
individual, what we would call the biological or the
primary um caregiver that is female that would nurse,
et cetera and give birth to an individual. Um
Ala mothers are um other mothers and that is really
the uh the norm among most human societies, traditionally
, as well as uh animal um societies. So
in the African elephants is that a baby is born
from to a particular female elephant. And prior to
the birth um that mother and the baby who's in
the mother is immersed in this constellation of aloe mothers
, other mothers, there are siblings, there's,
you know, teenagers, there's cousins and babies and
they're really this sort of organism that moves around and
, and uh is there to support the mother prior
to the birthing which takes two years in, in
African elephants at gestation. And, and afterwards,
so immediately when the baby is uh comes into the
world from the mother's womb, uh he or she
is literally surrounded by other elephants and family members and
supporters. So you have seamless connection um of being
in this community. And, and I think as
we go on it really in the sense of looking
at the evolved nest and child rearing and childbirthing,
et cetera. The implicit, which really should be
made more explicit is the um the need and the
role of a community. So it's not just the
mother, it's not just the father, it's really
a community effort of which the focal element of course
, is the birthing, the birthing mother or birthing
parent and, and the child. And of course
, 00 yeah, go ahead. Sorry. Yeah
, it's interesting that our species uh we are apes
. Uh We come from uh shared lineages with monkeys
earlier and monkeys tend to share and have fowl mothering
going on uh other nurturers and they share their babies
around, but all the other apes except us uh
keep uh it's just a mother that keeps her child
because she doesn't trust the others. Uh And that
they evolved then to just have mothers taking care of
their young. But humans, we brought back the
aloe mothering in it according to the evolutionary um ethology
uh data. And that's really important for us because
it actually shapes the brain to be much more flexible
in social relations. Because if you're only with one
mother, at least for humans, you tend to
be much more rigid about how to get along with
others because you only have practice with one really,
you know, in the first years. So you
want to have a set of, of nurturers,
people who are spons. Uh It's good for the
baby, but it's also good for a mother because
babies, the evolved nest is, you know,
rather demanding for, in terms of baby care.
Uh We are like fetuses when we're born, fetuses
of other animals for at least the 18 months,
uh the 1st 18 months of uh of age.
And so babies need to feel like they're still in
the womb. Uh And that requires a lot of
holding and moms just can't do it all. It's
like what? So that's why our species perhaps went
back to this collective uh child raising. And uh
the anthropologists tell us that it actually shaped our big
social brain to have cooperated child raising so that we
could have uh others providing the many calories we need
to be to build a big brain. So you
mentioned holding the baby there, what is the importance
of physical contact for the baby? And also by
the way for the mother or the other people who
take care of it. Well, in uh the
neuroscience is telling us that the touch is central to
helping establish uh well functioning uh biological systems like the
vagus nerve, uh the 10th cranial nerve that innervates
all the major systems of the body. And it's
being uh it's also fostered by breastfeeding. Uh And
um but touch is really important for that. And
if you don't get the vagus nerve well established,
you might have then health problems of various kinds later
, you know, digestive issues, uh heart uh
lung issues, brain seizures, that kind of thing
. When the vagus nerve is malfunctioning, it's also
the uh Oxytocin system. You want the endocrine system
systems to be established properly and touch really has a
lot to do with that. You wanna have that
cuddle hormone that carries you forward. So you,
you know, you actually like to be with people
and like to touch them and feel comforted by that
. So there's many different neurobiological aspects that are are
um affected by touch. It's calming it. Uh
of course, is gonna have epigenetic effects, turning
genes on and off that are gonna be oriented to
good health and touch needs to be positive touch,
not negative touch. We've got a lot of data
now on how even spanking uh a, a child
is like uh physical abuse or emotional abuse in its
long term effects, making the individual more aggressive,
less empathic and sensitive to others. I think even
at, at a deeper level, when we look
at um touch and we look at the aloe mothering
or the alo parenting, um it really underscores that
we're not these isolated units that essentially, yes,
there is an individual that comes into the world,
but that's like a piece of a bigger puzzle or
a piece of the tapestry. And so what we
see on the outside, you know what Darsha was
explaining and then looking from the neural sciences perspective,
what's happening on the inside from a science perspective is
really a reflection of the reality of oneness and connection
, even if it is in the case of the
brown bear. That's a chapter in our book.
Um There isn't an Aloe family per se, it's
a mother bear uh who births the babies. And
uh it's the hibernation den, which is really the
sort of the equivalent of the Aloe mothering elephants,
et cetera. But it's really the environment. And
so in, in another way too, it erases
the difference between social and ecological, those are just
sort of different elements of the same theme. So
there is this uh continuity, there is this coherence
and, and we see that as expressed in terms
of what Darsh is describing as, as touch and
positive touch in that way. So, you know
, it, it goes beyond the material. And
the neuroscience is, is just one way of sort
of keeping track of what those little pieces are from
the perspective of what science in our culture, modern
culture has relied on, which is dualism. But
really, we're looking at non dual consciousness, we're
really looking at this um coherence of oneness. So
we've mentioned mothers and mothers here. What about grandmothers
and the other older people in the community? What
is basically the role played by elders in human and
nonhuman societies? Well, they are part of the
Aloe parents allo mothers, other nurturers, right?
And uh there is a grandmother hypothesis that the reason
that women, human, human um women uh exist
to live beyond menopause is so that they can take
care of the young because again, the young are
young, need a lot of calories. And,
and there's data showing that when you have the grandmother
around the mother's mother, Children do better, they
have uh more, you know, better health and
so on. So that's uh kind of more of
a anthropological view. The uh indigenous perspective of course
, is that elders hold the wisdom of the community
and they uh they are repositories and they have all
the stories and experiences that help the community uh survive
and thrive wherever they are. So it's very landscape
specific. The language is from the landscape and uh
they are essential for the well being of the community
and their care of the very young Children is just
ideal because they both are sort of still in tune
or attuned to the UN manifest realm, the spiritual
realm and, and they're not so focused on,
you know, working and like, uh adults are
so they really get along well and, and the
grandparents are much more forgiving and less rigid and so
on with the very young so that actually knits together
the community. And when the native Americans uh in
Canada and the US uh were um considered savage and
the governments wanted to break down, make them,
you know, kill the Indian and save the soul
. They broke up those relationships, taking the Children
away and it really devastated the communities because the elders
didn't have the young as an anchor for themselves and
the young didn't have that community to foster their culture
and language and so on. So the intergenerational violence
uh continues uh from those horrible genocidal uh treatments.
Uh And of course, when we talk about child
rearing, we tend to focus a lot on the
mother and sometimes also other females. But what about
the father? Could you tell us perhaps about the
example of Emperor Penguins and the role that fathers play
there. We love Emperor Penguins. Of course,
I'll start off. Um Yeah, I think a
lot of people, they've been popularized in movies I've
heard and things like that. But the Emperor Penguins
live in the Antarctic and they're around 4 ft high
. And just a kind of a cartoon sketch of
, of the community is that the mother, the
mother and the father meet and they form partnerships and
make love. And then the mother produces this amazing
single egg and it's very, very cold there.
The conditions are very, very harsh. And so
she eventually lays the egg and is essentially when she
does that, it's almost immediately passed to the father
who is um now receives the egg and immediately puts
it under his feathers in this pouch. And the
purpose of that is because the the extreme cold there
, the wind chill factors makes it even greater and
he takes care of the egg while the egg is
becoming a baby and the mothers um they live in
a colony, I mean, there's all these individual
pairs and different relationships but they are within a,
a community. Uh It's a colony and the mothers
essentially all leave at that time, they birth roughly
probably at the same time and they go up to
a couple kom a couple 100 kilometers away off the
ice and into the ocean. And that is to
replenish because all of their energies has been diverted and
, and directed toward creating the egg and all the
nutrients and psychological, emotional everything has. So this
is going off to replenish and they spend a couple
of months there diving and looking for fish and,
and uh resting up and replenishing in the meanwhile,
the fathers are gathering, they each have an egg
. Uh and again, it's very protected and they
gather in what's called a huddle, which are a
group of, of uh fathers. And they do
that. Um you know, well, from a
physical perspective is that because it retains warmth, it
becomes this kind of thermal unit by which the temperatures
of the egg can be kept perfect, not too
hot, not too cold. And in order to
do that, they actually move, you know,
in, in a very choreographed way to the interior
of the huddle and then some go to the outside
. So again, this is this co ordination.
Again, this is a community so that there's a
baby, but it's a community and then the baby
is born and at that time, the mother returns
and essentially, then the fathers go off and they
are also depleted. Um Some have lost half their
weight, they go to the ocean and replete and
then they come back and it's a very emotional and
very intense time because typically the colonies are in the
thousands and they have to find their mother and their
wife and child. So, um doctor Andre who's
in France is a researcher talks very beautifully about this
that um they're very mindful. So again, we're
talking about a community and this is an important point
because they're all coordinating together. There isn't this notion
of competition there isn't this notion of me first or
anything like that. Um They give particular calls,
they each have their own idiolect call. And if
, if the guy next to you is calling for
his, they wait for, until that person can
call and identify. So eventually they're all uh brought
back together and they uh form a, a family
and it's very much, um the term is co
parenting. So, so there's a very much coordinate
at many scales between the mother and the father,
including the egg and then the mothers with the mothers
and the fathers with the fathers. And then again
, as the baby matures, then there is a
crash uh uh uh uh you know, a kind
of a coalescing of all the young chicks, um
you know, kind of like a kindergarten or whatever
, but they're all together, there really isn't any
kind of separation. And the other idea is that
connection is with community nonparent and, and with each
other in that way. So it, again,
this is just an example and we have examples uh
in the chapter on gray wolves, which is different
, but it, there does show the participation of
the, of the um of, of males and
same with the elephants. So I'll just put that
in real quick is um that uh the baby elephants
in Africa, they grow up in that Natal family
we described and then when they're, you know,
1112, 13, they are either pushed out or
they go out and they join, um, uh
, older males, what they call an all bull
group or area. And they spend at least 15
years, um, in association with this bull society
, male society. So there is not that kind
of segregation that we see. We see this very
much cooper and I would say just not even a
division. It's just everyone has the same goal and
they work with each other to make it work in
the best way possible for the babies and each other
. Mhm uh And so I guess that one very
important topic also to talk about here is attachment theory
. I guess it is very important in the context
of your book as was originally developed, I think
by Doctor John Bulby and then over the decades further
developed by other researchers and scholar. So what would
you say are perhaps some of the main insights that
we got from attachment theory when it comes to having
a better understanding of perhaps the social needs that we
and other species might have and how we establish social
relationships with other people. I'll start uh attachment has
to do with relation, relational belonging, essentially and
connectedness and maintaining that um those years when the brain
is growing so quickly that, you know, it's
, it's setting up its worldview, its sense of
self, its sense of relationships. And so uh
the uh attachment promoting care which is evolve nest,
then establish this this deep sense of security and safety
and relation and, and skilled, knowing how to
, you know, stop and start relationships or conversations
and recognizing who's trustworthy and um just being able to
maintain relationships across time, babies have to learn a
lot of non verbal skills before language comes about around
age two. And a lot of that is this
relational kind of socio emotional intelligence. So it has
also to do with your own uh understanding of your
own emotions and conveying those in ways that are appropriate
um with your uh relational experience in the moment?
A and is it uh just about, or is
it even primarily about the mother infant diet or does
it go beyond that? Because I mean, at
least when we commonly hear about attachment and attachment theory
, it's it tends to be mostly focused on the
mother, sometimes the other caregivers like the father,
for example, but people do not at least commonly
talk about other kinds of social relationships. But if
I understand it correctly, it goes beyond that.
Right. Right. So in Western civilization, which
has become patriarchal uh and emphasize the nuclear family,
all you have is mom, dad and the Children
, right, the emphasis of Western scholars has been
to look at the mother child diet because that's the
framework, the assumption that that's normal, but that
isn't normal for our species. Our species raised Children
in multiple aged, multi gender groups. And so
really the way I look at it is, mother
provides the first attachment and then she's the bridge to
the attachment to everyone else around. So that even
in some uh societies, I think the booty,
the the infant after a few days is passed around
uh to the group, uh whatever size it is
and the baby starts to get a sense of different
smells and different uh patterns of movement and gets comfortable
with all that and and builds a really a a
very a fabric supportive care around them. So they
, and they become attached even more than just to
people, to the natural world, around them,
to the animals and plants that they live with and
uh interact with. And so it's much broader,
this attachment, this sense of being belonging and connected
and relationally um kind of supported than what the Westerners
uh are studying and talk about. But what are
essentially the factors that lead to the development of a
secure attachment style and not uh let's say non secure
attachment style that could be an anxious, violent or
disorganized kind of attachment style, but it has to
do with the predictability of the caregivers. So providing
the evolved nest, so providing breastfeeding when the child
signals they want uh touch. When in our ancestral
context, nomadic foraging communities, babies aren't put down
, they're carried everywhere because they know uh they had
intuitions about how that baby is so vulnerable and required
such uh intensive care of uh to develop well.
And so the baby is having um relationships that are
um always responsive and nurturing in terms of touch and
just listening and emotionally honest and delightful. And in
those situations, the baby learns that everything is,
you know, you can predict it and um I'm
safe and these people are trustworthy and all that insecure
attachment comes from un inconsistent care. Uh We,
and we uh see that not in nomadic foraging communities
unless there's been some horrible accident or something. Uh
But in modern culture where babies are kind of,
you know, more like possessions than objects of control
. And uh when babies are left alone or left
to cry, uh and isolated physically, they're not
gonna feel that sense of belonging and safety and security
. And so we unfortunately have cultural myths about how
important it is to make babies independent, you know
, and oh, you're gonna spoil the baby if
you pick them up too much and all these crazy
ideas uh that actually undermine health for the long term
. So when you can, when you uh build
an insecure attachment, which could be anxious or avoiding
depending on uh exactly when and how you were treated
when you're insecure you, uh it means your neurobiology
has been shaped to be, you know, kind
of disregulation and you don't maybe know how to make
friends and you don't know how to maintain a friendship
and you don't know how to recognize a trustworthy relationship
. And so it gets you into all sorts of
trouble. Uh prof uh professors tend to have avoidant
attachment, which is this detached way of looking at
things not emotionally available because that's how, what they
experienced as babies. And so it's very easy to
go in the Ivory Tower and make up stuff,
you know, and then apply your, you know
, your little model to the world. Maybe it
works, maybe it doesn't, but you get a
publication and, you know, you're not committed and
emotionally attuned. Um And so we've created a world
where we reward that kind of um avoid an attachment
uh with, you know, status and such and
that's destructive to the planet. It's destructive to nature
because we're not relationally attuned with our emotions, with
our commitment, with our moral commitment to the well
being of everyone human and nonhuman around us. And
, and I would say that um John boldly really
made quite a contribution because he really made visible,
the invisible, which was this notion of the importance
of relationship and the quality of relationship. But within
that, again, this is not a criticism because
that's a it's a step in the evolution of the
western cultures way of looking at things. You're still
having one thing attaching to another thing. And when
you look through the lens of nonhuman nature, everyone's
attached, there is no attachment, there are no
strings, it's all one big soup. So quote
, unquote, attachment is just the way animals live
. And so that the, the specificity of it
, for example, the, the importance of the
mother with the nursing, the way Darsha was discussing
it or the, the, the way that the
, the passing of the egg with the father,
those are important elements, but it's all everyone's attached
. It's the non attachment that um Darsha was talking
about in the sense of some kind of perturbation,
some kind of, you know, causing a gap
or schism between you and me. Um or you
know, the baby and the parent or whatever that
is, that's the anomaly. And, and essentially
so, like I said, when we look from
through the baseline of nonhuman nature, there is no
attachment. It's we, we are all attached and
that's really what we're coming back into. And um
and, and the work that we've done together is
really trying to bridge that and, and move us
into this paradigm of the baseline of we're all attached
. We, we are, we just are in
that way. So the evolved nest is about meeting
basic needs, everyone's basic needs. There's no argument
about meeting the needs that you just provide and that
and nature's gift economy is that way too. You
take the fruit and then you, you, your
waste becomes some other animals uh food. And uh
it's just this ongoing cycle of giving and taking and
giving without uh a sense of disconnection, right?
You're just in it like uh gay said in a
soup and what the Western world has done is just
divided and disconnected all over the place, disconnected body
from mind, uh spirit from uh humanity. Uh
It's just a, a big mess of division that
I, we hope our book will help people realize
that that's not the way we evolved to be and
that's not helpful for the planet. And then,
yeah, go ahead and just real quick. I
think what's a challenge? And we're hoping as Darsha
said that the book will help, you know,
support people make that shift is essentially from one paradigm
of dualism. We can call it dualism pieces.
You know, all the pieces. You me,
they, we all those things into oneness into non
dualism. And it really takes um either an experience
or a leap of faith. But you, you
, you at one point, you have to kind
of jump in, you have to jump in and
say, do we see ourselves as you and me
and separate that we're putting together an assemblage? Or
are we just one of which I'm an expression?
You're an expression of a part, et cetera.
And that's really what this is an example of,
of, of um encouraging people to jump into that
new view because then the other pieces like the elements
of the evolved nest, they just kind of come
out naturally. I mean, there may be some
questions like, well, how do I do this
? How do I transition, you know, I
don't have a grandparent or whatever, but then solutions
start to come up. OK? We don't have
grandparents, but we have our neighbors. Let's start
to talk with our neighbors and create this kind of
um you know, mosaic um that, that,
that moves into to oneness. So we're talking about
in inter being, right? We are all uh
you are me, I am you, it's uh
there's no real separation. We're just, you know
, little uh pieces of the whole, the implicate
order and our uh ability to de differentiate ourselves to
see how we're alike, to see how we are
connected. And all in this flowing dynamic universe is
really our aim here and the animal uh images and
how they, they know this, right? We
have so much to learn from our animal kin.
Uh And so we hope that's what the book will
. Uh But at a certain point there, you
mentioned uh needs uh what are needs exactly or perhaps
a better question is where do they come from exactly
what constitutes a child's in need? And I mean
, since uh of course, in the book,
we explore other nonhuman species, uh does that mean
that perhaps some of the of these needs are quote
unquote, hard wired or uh are there are Children
perhaps at least to some extent responsive to the eco
uh the ecology they develop in uh when it comes
to developing their own specific needs? Well, the
way I look at it and gay can uh add
her perception. Uh the way I look at it
is that we're animals. And so we all need
some nourishment. We need shelter, we need protection
, we need warmth, uh or else we die
, right? But, but we're also mammals,
social mammals and we need affection to grow. Well
, we need the touch, right? We need
play to grow well, so basic needs to grow
the optimal uh kind of member of the species.
That's what you want to meet. And that's we
have to identify uh basic needs by what leads to
optimality. And we also are humans, we need
to have meaning uh and make meaning. And so
the stories that our culture tells us, guides our
behavior and guides our, our desires, our experiences
build our desires, right? To be close and
affectionate or distant and detached, right? Depending on
the kind of early experience you had. So basic
needs really lead to optimization of the individual and the
community. Now, uh Maslow has had his hierarchy
of needs. He learned he got inspired by the
Blackfoot nation, the six AA. And unfortunately,
he turned it upside down because for the Blackfoot self
actualization is fundamental in primary and that's what the evolved
N does. For each individual. It fosters your
uniqueness, you can unfold and blossom because all your
needs are being mad and everybody loves you and you
feel like you belong. But he put that as
the end point, the end point for the Blackfoot
is cultural perpetuity community well being so that the culture
will, and that means the bio community that in
, in which you're entangled is going to live into
the future seven generations, right? And we,
you know, uh Maslow got very individualistic, which
is the western way instead of this communal orientation that
, that understands that we don't become our best selves
unless we have those basic needs met all along the
way throughout life. Mhm A and what I,
in what ways can early life experiences have far reaching
impacts? Well, that's what I write about uh
quite a bit uh in terms of morality. Um
but it's also social capacities. So uh as I
mentioned earlier, within secure attachment, you're kind of
uh hampered, you have a uh inability unless you
heal it later with some interventions. Uh you get
along that well with others. Now, my work
looks at how our early experience, if you stress
a baby so that they learn to be uh threat
, reactive, stress, reactive because they've been stressed
so much that stress response is easily triggered, that's
gonna shape how they act with others and their moral
decisions. What's right? What's wrong? And in
the moment, they'll be more likely to feel afraid
and brace against others, brace against life instead of
being open hearted and flexible, you know, and
attuned. So, uh that's gonna affect how they
think about the world, they'll be more likely to
have, uh, scripted, rigid ideas of black
and white up and down, more oriented to dominance
hierarchies. You know, either you're either up or
you're down, you're either a winner or a loser
, that kind of orientation. And each moment they
can bring, uh, if they feel unsafe in
the moment they're gonna go into that mode and their
, their morality then is gonna affect everyone else.
I mean, we're seeing far reaching, we're experiencing
the far reaching effects of, of early development.
I mean, if you look at the history of
, of humanity over the last, we'll just say
102 100 years, uh it has been violent,
it has been breaking down, it's been um insecure
attachment, generating writ large and none of that has
been processed. So when you have someone who is
severely traumatized um through genocide, through poverty, through
the industrial technological development, which has gotten intensified.
Um the, the they're, they're thrust back into
it and there really is an Ame or of there
isn't a um a healing, a receiving healing community
. So even though a baby is brought up in
a certain that's obviously very critical. But the community
, in other words, the culture has to be
one that uh supports that individual. And if they're
not, if they're the same thing in a sense
, you just continue on this very, very destructive
path, which is what we see right now.
And unfortunately, in the nonhuman world. That's why
you're seeing PTSD complex ptsd just to use technical terms
among African elephants never existed. Nothing like that.
The orc is off Spain, nothing like that.
And, and so, you know, we,
we can just analyze it from a very narrow view
of neuropsychology. But essentially, you're seeing this profound
ricocheting of, you know, one child experiencing insecure
attachment and then it perpetuating, perpetuating, perpetuating without
any kind of balance in terms of healing that individual
. And there are individual cultures, human cultures that
have a very different way when an individual uh for
whatever reason, um sort of steps out the bounds
of morality, what do they do? They do
not expel that individual, they gather around, they
absorb, it's inclusive. And again, what Darsha
was talking is about that inter being, it's our
responsibility for that person, that individual. And so
that's, you know, these are elements of socialism
, right? Where it has to do with the
fact of that um your poverty or my poverty or
their poverty or their problem, quote unquote is my
problem. So it's a very different what this is
really saying is is that in order for us to
uh heal, in order for us to bring cohesion
and well being back on the planet within our species
and then the entire planet, which is made chaotic
by our human behavior is that we have to be
inclusive. We don't shut them away in prisons,
we don't stick people away and get rid of them
, we bring them back and a number of the
indigenous societies, that's how they function. They,
they, they sort of, you know, absorb
that individual. And again, that's another lesson of
the evolved nest. It's not just a person with
a mother or with a father, it's um,
it's an organism. So, really, although we
talk a lot about child raising and things like that
, it really comes down to, um, revitalizing
those elements of the evolved nest which are in,
I think chapter 10 or whatever, they're sort of
listed. I mean, they're not, they're just
kind of pointers to something which is much of a
, but that's really the focus is that, that's
how we can start on the path, that's how
we can break the cycle. Mhm. Uh And
do you think that perhaps some of the issues that
we are experiencing in industrialized and post industrial societies nowadays
have to do with some of these more individualistic values
that we have where people are raised to think that
perhaps they shouldn't uh try to depend so much on
others and there's not so much the sense of community
. Uh I mean, uh also because I guess
that, uh uh looking at our own evolutionary history
and, uh, and other species, we are
very much dependent on others. And I mean,
that idea that the, just an isolated individual,
uh and, uh, and the, if it's
not that then you're like spoiled or something like that
and you are just completely over dependent on others.
I mean, that's uh incorrect. That's it.
It's particularly strong here, I think in the United
States. Um, and I think it's unfortunately spread
but it, it's considered something negative or bad to
say I need, I need to something, you
know, can you help me out? Um,
there's a lot of shame associated with that and for
the rejection. So you get this spiral. So
, you know, to show kind of vulnerability is
really considered to be something is used on as,
as, as prey. We have a predator,
we've developed a predatorial culture. So when there's someone
who is, who shows vulnerability, um they're rejected
and they are uh preyed upon in, in that
way. So again, the elements of the that
are, you know, sort of itemized in the
evolved nest to highlight certain things really are um paths
and principles which can really help our culture. Um
Our species return to, I would believe it's,
it's natural goodness where you want to call it in
in that way. So I can add a little
bit more um when we under care for chil young
Children. So don't provide the nest, we're undermining
the development of the right hemisphere, the right hemisphere
is scheduled to grow more rapidly. And it's the
part of our brain that is oriented to dynamic relationships
and living things and has a sense of uh it's
the seed of our self-regulation initially and empathy and higher
consciousness. And when we under care for Children,
that's uh you know, not developed so well.
And then they have to rely on the survival systems
that are innate so that dominance, uh submission and
territoriality and rivalry things. Um part of the reptilian
brain, right? Um I mean, it's insulting
reptiles but um and then we send them to school
and train their left brain. Left brain is all
in the ego consciousness. It thinks it knows everything
, it doesn't know very much. It's good at
linear, you know, kind of analysis, but
it can't deal with dynamism, it likes static objects
, things it can measure, you know, and
so the western world has been taken over by the
left hemisphere and this is Ian mcgilchrist Point and is
running us, of course into the grave because we
forgot how to develop, how to foster an integrated
brain. Both halves are really important. But we
have now put ourselves in the hands of this very
detached robotic part of ourselves and guided by survival systems
, you know. So predation is part of the
left brain's orientation, manipulation of the world. Yeah
. And as, as Dar brought up the,
the, the notion of the reptilian brain is kind
of an artifact from science that reptiles, uh tortoises
and alligators, rattlesnakes, they all have the same
brain that we do and they all show uh the
same what we would call prosocial behavior, they care
for each other's young. They are non a grass
, um, they're very, um, community oriented
and, um, they don't strike in violence except
, you know, when it's absolutely necessary. And
so, you know, those are the kinds of
myths which is also, have come along with,
this is, um, uh, separating ourselves.
Oh, we're not like them now, whether that's
another animal or whether it's another human and valor these
aspects that, of the left brain in the,
in the language of neuroscience that Darsh has been talking
about and that's very, very deep conditioning. So
in the case of, you know, that this
is this whole, you know, schooling the world
, you know, even if you brought up,
you know, um and, and I can have
personal experience growing if you grow up in an evolved
nest kind of situation, but you're shunted into this
conveyor belt of um you know, II I it's
kind of a sociopathy, you know, where you're
basically punished in various ways and not just physical but
socially, all those things you're conditioned into letting go
of the right brain into uh into sort of squelching
these wonderful and beautiful feelings inside that are natural,
which seed and nurture those uh um within those that
you, that you meet. So we're, we're
put into this conveyor belt and then that becomes a
matter of quote unquote survival. If you're not like
this, then you don't belong and you're excluded.
And unfortunately, it's evolved to such a system where
it really comes down to, are you with us
or are you against us? We see that in
political systems, we see that in social systems,
et cetera. So it's really this move to um
you know, taking back our wholeness, taking back
ourselves. And in that, which is critical is
understanding that nonhumans, that's why it works for billions
of years. That's why nature has worked for billions
of years. And so we can say, OK
, I'm, I'm gonna side with them. I'm
gonna side with nature. I wanna be more like
nature, I wanna be more like the penguins.
I wanna be more like the wolves and by making
that kind of solidarity, that kind of commitment saying
those are my people, these are my kin then
that in itself opens up an incredible amount of the
life force that really is responsible for creating this incredible
planet that we live on. Mhm So I would
like to ask you now, since in the book
, you talk a lot about what we can learn
from traditional societies, indigenous societies, for example,
uh because in modern industrialized and post industrial societies,
even with the issues that we have. Uh some
of them we've talked here about today, um we
still have many positive things like for example, some
very positive technological advancements that make our lives better and
easier. So I would like to ask you,
how do you think we could perhaps strike a balance
here between some of the positives of those more traditional
societies without perhaps having to ditch, uh, the
other positive things that we have in our, uh
, industrialized societies. Well, I think, um
, it's a tough question actually, but there are
traditional societies who weren't nomadic foragers who have lived with
localization where they have their, you know, they
raise their own food, they, they have their
own energy. They have, they use the cycle
of, of life on their farms, right?
So the waste from the animals or themselves goes into
the garden and grows as the natural uh fertilizer.
So they, they're not poisoning the the soil,
they're not dishonoring uh this the earth and they have
ways of being that are tuned in to the well
being of that landscape right there. So I think
we have to go back to these small kind of
communities and then perhaps with the renewable energies, we
can still maintain zoom conversations, for example, those
are nice. Yeah, I would like to keep
having those. Yeah, but we don't need so
much. I mean, there's so much wastefulness um
in our because it makes money for people and it
raises the G GDP, right? The more you
waste. So we have to get back to understanding
that we are relational uh beings and every um plant
animal river mountain is part of our kin and we
need to be concerned about their well being and not
be greedy for what we think we need. But
you know, the early under care is gonna lead
us to be more greedy and trying to make up
for that hole we have in our heart from disconnection
from uh disrespected um early childhood. So we have
to kind of work at multiple levels. Bring back
the evolved n for the young re nest, the
adults get them calmed down, get them more tuned
in to the the cosmos, to their relational responsibilities
, feel more at ease and at peace being a
member of the earth community. Uh And so perhaps
just one last question and I have asked you about
traditional society. So when comparing ourselves to other animals
and we've gone through several examples here today. Uh
what do you think we can learn from them that
would be applicable to human societies? Well, I'll
continue with what Darsha said. Um I don't think
we need any of the things that we call um
human achievements. I mean, all of those things
are prosthetics that are substitutes for what the evolved nest
and the rest of nature lives by and provides.
Um I mean, zoom. Zoom is wonderful because
we get to meet you and each other and,
and things like that. But uh if we were
living together and whatever, we, we don't need
that. I mean, I may not, I
may have never met you. Um which would be
sad, but at the same time, how sad
. I mean, in other words, they,
what we, there's so much loss that is uh
associated with the things that we think have gained us
. I see these as this is their intermediate steps
and that we need to give up those kinds of
things. They, they really, they keep us
, I mean, right now, they provide an
incredible ability to kind of revitalize and communicate and kind
of get back to where we are. But none
of the rest of the other species need what we
say we need and they do very well and they're
very happy. So all the things we cherish,
like wellness and good relationships and security and peace.
That's what the animal world has without modern humans.
And so if it really gets down to that,
I think we just really need to sort of say
, well, we don't really need all these things
. These are just transitional objects that move us into
what Darsha was talking about. Um and life will
be much better. So II, I think it's
not just um I think, I think we need
to aspire to be who the animals are and who
the trees and the plants are. And those with
those with insecure attachment tend to be quite restless.
They don't feel at ease and because of course,
they didn't, they didn't get their needs met.
And so they, they're anxious, you know,
where am I gonna get them met? And so
you try all these things, addictions and various things
to try to calm down. Um, but if
, if we provide the evolved nest or when we
have nested lives, we have a fullness of now
. We feel connected to everything now and we see
all the dynamism and we can hardly, you know
, look away from the beauty of, of life
. Whereas when you have an under cared for,
under nested person, they're worried and they're, you're
thinking about the past. Oh, I did all
that wrong and they're depressed about that and then they're
worried about the future and all and they're hardly in
the present moment because they didn't get enough practice for
it. They couldn't, I mean, it was
too painful to be in the present moment. They
had to dissociate when they were left alone to cry
or left alone, abandoned in some way. Uh
So we have to get back to the fullness of
right hemisphere functioning, the full integrated brain where we
feel uh this life is so beautiful and we are
all in it together and let's, you know,
sing, let's dance, let's play together. That's
what we aim for. That's, that's the flourishing
human community that we um see as our promise,
we can still return to that. Uh And so
that's what we aim for. And I think we
see that um individually, I think everyone, why
it feels so nice to be in nature. Hey
, there, there are no TV. S there
are no iphones. Um, just being in nature
and then also just things like, um, I
mean, not everyone but a lot of people have
fun having a picnic or have fun going camping.
Well, that's because there's not all those things.
Right. And, and there is that so that
those are sort of touch points and, and indicators
that that's our natural, that's our natural path,
that's our natural inclination to well being and peace.
So we can all go find a sit spot near
us where we can tune into nature and go there
regularly and that'll open up our senses. We can
all uh be um activists for our local rivers,
creeks, forests, um trees, animals, native
animals. Uh you know, it just get out
there and be committed to the bio community that you're
a member of. Great. So I think that's
a great message to end the interview on. Uh
the book is again the Evolved Nest Nature's way of
raising Children and creating connected communities. I'm leaving a
link to it in the description box of this interview
. Uh And by the way, would you like
to tell people apart from the book where they can
find you and your work on the internet? Uh
The Evolve Nest Evolve nest.org. And we have a
movie on this uh that's based in this book.
It's uh eight minutes long there. And there's a
couple other movies too that you can watch free.
No, it's a nonprofit So there's different tools for
re nesting. We have an evolved nest curriculum you
can do on your own to learn about and then
apply evolve nest principles and our um website where there's
material as well as uh Kulas. It's www dot
Kos K er Ul os.org and that's the Kula Center
for Nonviolence. So theres information there. Great.
So I'm adding that also to the description of the
interview and doctors Narvaez and Bradshaw. Thank you so
much again for taking the time to come on the
show. It's been a real pleasure to talk to
you. Thank you, Ricardo. Thank you so
much. Good to see you. Hi guys.
Thank you for watching this interview. Until the end
. If you like what I'm doing, please consider
supporting the show on Patreon and paypal. The links
are in the description down below and also please share
like and hit the subscription button. The show is
brought to you by N Lights learning and development.
Then differently check their website at N lights.com. I
would also like to give a thank you to my
main patrons and papal supporters per Larson, Jerry Muller
and Frederick Sun Bernard Seche Olaf, Alex Adam Castle
Matthew Whittenberg, Arno of Tim Hollowing, Eric Aleni
John Connors Philip for Connolly. Then the Metro Robert
Winde INAs Yu Mar Nevs Colin Holbrook, Simon Columbus
, Phil, Governor Mikel Stormer Samuel Andre Francis for
Agns Fergal Cousin Hall Herz RGN. Michel, Jonathan
lebron Jars and Samuel K Eric Heinz Mar Smith J
We Hummel sad friends. David Sloan Wilson Yas de
Ro Di NP please. Nicole Barbaro, Adam Hunt
. Pablo Stassi Alek Bach Ma he s of Zal
Adrian Yi Paulin John Bar. Poo Julian Price Hall
, Eden Bruner Douglas Fry Franco Beto Lotti Gabriel Cortez
or Lolis Scott Zachary Fish, Tim Da and Smith
John Wilman, Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul
Giorgio, Luke Lo the Chris Williams and Peter Walla
and David Williams the Costa Anton Erickson Charles Murray,
Alex Show, Marie Martinez Coral Chevalier, Bangalore Larry
Dey junior, Old Herring, Starry Michael Bay.
Then Spur by Robert Grassy Zorn, Jeff mcmahon,
Jake Zul Barnabas Radis Mark Temple, Thomas Dubner and
Luke Ni Andre to Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Gilbert Jessica
Nowicki Linda Brandon Nicholas Carlson, Ismael Bensley Man.
George Tori is Valentin Steinman, Paul Crowley Kate Von
Goler, Alexander Hubbard, Liam Donaway Biar Masoud Ali
Mohammadi Perpendicular Jonas Herner. Slow. Good enough,
Gregory Hastings and David Pins of a special thanks to
my producers is our web, Jim Frank Lucas Stina
, Tom Ween, Bernard, Nic Ortiz Dixon Benedict
Muller Thomas Trumble Catherine and Patrick Tobin Jean Carlo Montenegro
, Al Nick Ortiz Nick Golden and Rosie. And
to my executive producers, Matthew Lavender, Serge Adrian
and Bogdan Kenny. Thank you for all.